# in-toto Specification #

Apr 11, 2017
https://in-toto.io
Version 0.9

## 1 Introduction
### 1.1 Scope

This document describes in-toto, a system for securing the way in which
software is developed, built, tested, and packaged (i.e., the software supply
chain). in-toto attests to the integrity and verifiability of all the actions
performed while writing code, compiling, testing, and deploying software. It
does so by making it transparent to the user what steps were performed, by whom
and in what order. As a result, given guidance by the group creating the
software, in-toto allows the user to verify if a step in the supply chain was
intended to be performed, if the step was performed by the right actor, and
attests that materials (e.g., source code) were not tampered with between
steps.

### 1.2 Motivation

Supply chain security is crucial to the overall security of a software product.
An attacker who is able to control a step in the supply chain can alter the
product for malicious intents that range from introducing backdoors in the
source code to including vulnerable libraries in the final product. Because of
its susceptibility to these threats, a supply chain breach is an impactful
means for an attacker to affect multiple users at once.


Although many frameworks ensuring security in the "last mile" (e.g., software
updaters) exist, they may be providing integrity and authentication to a
product that is already vulnerable; it is possible that, by the time the
package makes it to a software update repository, it has already been
compromised.  

### 1.3 History and credit

September 19, 2016 -- Version 0.1 of this document is released

April 11, 2017 -- version 0.9 of this document is released

### 1.4 Context

A software supply chain is the series of steps performed when writing, testing,
packaging, and distributing software. In a typical software supply chain, these
multiple steps that transform (e.g., compiling) or verify the state (e.g.,
linting) of the project are "chained" together in order to drive it to a final
product. 

### 1.5 Goals

in-toto aims to provide integrity, authentication and auditability to the
supply chain as a whole. This means that all the steps within the supply chain
are clearly laid out, that the parties involved in carrying out  a step are
explicitly stated, and that each step carried out meets the requirements
specified by the actor responsible for this software product.

#### 1.5.1 Goals for implementation

* The client side of the framework must be straightforward to implement in any
  programming language and for any platform with the requisite cryptographic
support (as described in sections 4.1 and 4.2).
* The framework should be easy to integrate with existing installers, build
  systems, testing frameworks, version control systems, and software update
systems.
* The framework should be easily customizable for use with any cryptographic
  library.
* The process by which functionaries gather metadata about the steps carried
  out must be simple and nonintrusive. This should also be true for the process
by which project owners define the supply chain.

#### 1.5.2 Defender goals and non-goals

In the context of in-toto, a defender is the client (i.e., the person who will
install the software product). We assume the actors performing steps in the
supply chain (functionaries) and the actors in charge of a software product
(project owners) are not acting maliciously. With this in mind, we describe the
following goals for a defender.

**Goals**:

The user's goal is to install a target software product that has gone through
all the steps of the supply chain and is identified as legitimate. This means
that no step was changed, removed, or added into the software development
process that the project owner intended. To verify legitimacy, the user also
wants to make sure that the software installed came from the designated project
owner.


**Non-goals**:

We are not trying to protect against a functionary (or actor in the supply
chain)  who unwittingly introduces a vulnerability while following all steps of
the supply chain as designed. We are trying to prevent such functionaries from
performing operations other than the ones intended for a supply chain. For
example, if two people are in charge of running the packaging scripts, in-toto
can verify that this is the case by verifying in-toto metadata regarding this
operation.  We assume that there will not be two colluding (or deceived)
developers who jointly introduce a vulnerability. 

We also assume the project owner laid out the supply chain (using a supply
chain layout as described in section 4.3) so that testing, code review, and
verification into the software supply chain gives meaningful security and
quality guarantees. While we provide auditability properties so third parties
can study and assess the steps of the supply chain to ensure that defenders
follow best practices regarding software quality, we do not enforce any
specific set of rules. For example, it is possible to configure the supply
chain layout so that no code review is performed and a package is built on an
untrusted server --- which is an incredibly insecure configuration.  While this
may be visible to users installing the software, in-toto's role is not to judge
or block layouts  that are insecure. However, tools that integrate into in-toto
may independently block or make judgments about the security of a specific
layout.  

#### 1.5.3 Assumptions

The client side tools should perform key-management on behalf of the user.
Apart from the layout key, the client is never required to retrieve and provide
keys for verification. We are exploring mechanisms to distribute layout keys
securely.

For cases where trust delegation is meaningful, a functionary should be able to
delegate full or limited trust to other functionaries to perform steps on her
or his behalf.

#### 1.5.4 System properties

To achieve the goals stated above, we anticipate a system with the following
properties:

* **Final product authentication and integrity**: the product received by the
  client was created by the intended party. This ensures the final product
matches bit-by-bit the final product reported by the last step in the supply
chain.
* **Process compliance and auditability**: the product received by the client
  followed the layout specified by the project owner. All steps described have
their materials and products correctly linked together, and, if audited by a
third party, he or she can verify that all steps were performed as described.
For example, within the in-toto metadata, it is possible to see the unit test
server’s signed statement that the software passed all of its unit tests, or
check git commit signatures to validate that a certain code review policy was
used.
* **Traceability and attestation**: the conditions under which each step within
  the supply chain was performed can be identified, as well as the materials
used and the resulting products.
* **Step authentication**: the actor who carries out different steps within the
  supply chain provides evidence of the step using an unforgeable identifier.
This means if Alice tagged a release, the evidence provided could only be
produced by Alice.
* **Task and privilege separation**: the different steps within the supply chain
  can be assigned to different parties to perform. This means, if Alice is the
only functionary allowed to tag a release, releases tagged by Bob will not be
trusted if present in the supply chain.

In addition, the framework must provide an interface to interact with client
systems that further verify the integrity of each step.

### 1.6 Terminology

* **Software supply chain (or SSC)**: the series of actions performed to create
  a software product. These steps usually begin with users committing to a
version control system and end with the software product's installation on a
client's system.
* **Supply chain layout (or simply layout, or layout metadata)**: a signed file
  that dictates the series of steps that need to be carried out in the SCC to
create a  final product. The layout includes ordered steps, requirements for
such steps, and the list of actors (or functionaries) in charge of carrying out
every step. The steps within the supply chain are laid out by a project owner.
* **Sublayout**: A supply chain layout that describes steps as part of another
  supply chain layout.
* **Project owner**: the authoritative figure within a project. The project
  owner will dictate which steps are to be carried out in the supply chain, and
who is authorized to carry out each step  (i.e., define the layout).
* **Functionary**:  an individual or automated script that will perform an
  action within the supply chain. For example, the actor in charge of compiling
a project's source code is a functionary.
* **Supply chain step**: a single action in the software supply chain, which is
  performed by a functionary.
* **Link**: metadata information gathered while performing a supply chain step
  or inspection, signed by the functionary that performed the step or the
client that performed the inspection. This metadata includes information such
as materials, products and byproducts.
* **Materials**: the elements used (e.g., files) to perform a step in the
  supply chain. Files generated by one step (e.g., .o files) can be materials
for a step further down the chain (e.g., linking).
* **Product**: the result of carrying out a step. Products are usually
  persistent (e.g,. files), and are often meant to be used as materials on
subsequent steps. Products are recorded as part of link metadata.
* **Artifact**: a material or a product, as described above.
* Byproducts: indirect results of carrying out a step, often used to verify
  that a step was performed correctly. A byproduct is information that will not
be used as a material in a subsequent step, but may provide insight about the
process. For example, the stdout, stdin and return values are common byproducts
that can be inspected to verify the correctness of a step. Byproducts are
recorded as part of link metadata.
* **Final product**: the bundle containing all the files required for the
  software's installation on the client's system. This includes link metadata,
layout metadata, target files, and any additional metadata required for the
product's verification (e.g., a digital signature over the installation files).
* **Client inspection step**: a step carried out on the client's machine to
  verify information contained in the final product. Client inspection steps
also produce Link metadata that can be used by sublayouts and other inspection
steps.
* **Verification**: the process by which data and metadata included in the
  final product is used to ensure its correctness. Verification is performed by
the client by checking the supply chain layout and links for correctness, as
well as by performing the inspection steps.
* **Target files**: Any file that is not part of in-toto metadata (i.e., not a
  layout or a link file).  In the case of an installer, these files will often
be unpacked from within the final product and made ready for use on the user’s
system.

## 2 System overview

The main goal of in-toto is to provide authentication, integrity and
auditability guarantees for the supply chain that created a final product that
a client will install. 

To avoid ambiguity, we will refer to any files in the final product that
in-toto does not use to verify supply chain integrity as "target files." Target
files are opaque to the framework.  Whether target files are packages
containing multiple files, single text files, or executable binaries is
irrelevant to in-toto.

The portion of the in-toto layout describing target files is the information
necessary to indicate which functionaries are trusted to modify or create such
a file. Additional metadata, besides layout and link metadata, can be provided
along with target files to verify other properties of the supply chain (e.g.,
was a code review policy applied?) when inspecting the final product.

The following are the high-level steps for using the framework, as seen from
the viewpoint of an operating system’s package manager. This is an error-free
case:

1. The project owner creates a layout. This describes the steps that every
   functionary must perform, as well as the specific inspection steps that must
be performed on the client's machine.
2. Each functionary performs his or her usual tasks within the supply chain
   (e.g., the functionary in charge of compilation compiles the binary), and
records link metadata about that action. After all steps are performed by
functionaries, the metadata and target files are aggregated into a final
product.
3. The client obtains the final product, and verifies that all steps were
   performed correctly. This is done by checking that all materials used were
products of the intended steps, that each step was performed by the authorized
functionary, and that the layout was created by the right project owner. If
additional verification is required on the accompanying metadata (e.g., to
verify VCS-specific metadata), the client will then perform additional
inspection steps. If verification is successful, installation is carried out as
usual.

### 2.1 Involved parties and their roles

In the context of in-toto, a role is a set of duties and actions that an actor
must perform. 

In the description of the roles that follows, it is important to remember that
the framework has been designed to allow a large amount of flexibility for many
different use cases. Given that every project uses a very specific set of tools
and practices, this is a necessary requirement for in-toto.

There are three roles in the framework:


* **Project owner**: defines the layout of a software supply chain
* **Functionary**: performs a step in the supply chain and provides a piece of
  link metadata as a record that such a step was carried out. 
* **Client**: Performs verification on the final product by checking the
  provided layout and link metadata.

In addition, there are third-party equivalents of the above roles, which are
managed by the sublayout mechanism, described in section 2.1.3. We will
elaborate on these roles in depth now.

#### 2.1.1 Project owner 

As previously stated, the project owner sets the required steps to be performed
in the supply chain. For each step, its requirements, and the specific public
keys that can sign for evidence of the step are included to ensure compliance
and accountability. In addition, the layout file will contain the definition of
inspection steps to be carried out when verifying the final product.

#### 2.1.2 Functionaries

Functionaries are intended to carry out steps within the supply chain, and to
provide evidence of this by means of link metadata.

A functionary is uniquely identified by the public key that he or she will use
to sign a piece of link metadata as evidence that a step within the supply
chain was performed.

A functionary can allow a third-party define a step or series of steps of the
supply chain a sublayout. In this case, a subset of the steps to be performed
are defined by such a functionary, who adopts the role of a project owner for
this sublayout.

#### 2.1.3 Clients

Clients are users or automated tools who want to use the product. 

The client will perform verification on the final product. This includes
verifying the layout metadata, and that the link metadata provided matches the
specified layout described in the metadata, and performing inspection steps to
ensure that any additional metadata and target files meet the criteria
specified by the layout for this inspection step.

A client will likely not interact with the in-toto framework directly, as it
should be integrated into system installation tools, or package managers.

#### 2.1.4 Third-party sublayouts

Sublayouts allow a functionary to further define steps within the supply chain.
When a functionary defines a sublayout, instead of carrying out the next step,
she or he will define the series of steps required as if she or he was a
project owner for the steps in this sublayout. This is helpful if the project
owner does not know the specifics of a step, but trusts a functionary to
specify them later.

Sublayouts can also be used for third-party sections of the supply chain. For
example, a package maintainer for a Linux distribution will likely trust all
the steps in the version control system as a sublayout defined by upstream
developers of each package.

### 2.2 in-toto components

A in-toto implementation contains three main components: 

* A tool to generate and design supply chain layouts. This tool will be used by
  the project owner to generate a desired supply chain layout file. There are
many tools in the reference implementation to aid project owners in creating
and signing layouts.
* A tool that functionaries can use to create link metadata about a step. For
  example, in the reference implementation, this tool is called
"in-toto-run.py".
* A tool to be used by the client to perform verification on the final product.
  This tool uses all of the link and layout metadata generated by the previous
tools.  It also performs the inspection steps, as directed by the layout.  This
tool is often included in a package manager or system installer. In the case of
the reference implementation, the tool performing this operation is
"in-toto-verify.py".

### 2.3 System workflow example

To exemplify how these roles interact, we will describe a simple scenario. We
provide more specific scenarios in section 5.1, after we have presented a more
thorough description of the framework. 

Consider a project owner, Alice, and her two functionaries, Diana and Bob.
Alice wants Diana to write a Python script (foo.py).  Then, Alice wants Bob to
package the script into a tarball (foo.tar.gz). This tarball will be sent to
the client, Carl, as part of the final product.  Carl’s target file is
foo.tar.gz.

When providing the tarball to Carl, Alice will create a layout file that Carl
will use to make sure of the following:

* That the script was written by Diana 
* That the packaging was done by Bob
* That the script contained in the tarball matches the one that Diana wrote, so
  if Bob is malicious or if the packaging program has an error, Carl will
detect it.

In order to do this, Carl will require four files in the final product: first,
Alice’s layout, describing the requirements listed above.  Then, a piece of
link metadata that corresponds to Diana’s action of writing a script, and a
piece of link metadata for Bob’s step of packaging the script.  Finally, the
target file (foo.tar.gz) must also be contained in the final product.

When Carl verifies the final product, his installer will perform the following
checks:

1. The layout file exists and is signed with a trusted key (in this case,
   Alice's). 
1. Every step in the layout has one or more corresponding link metadata files
   signed by the intended functionaries, as described in the layout (in this
case, the link metadata provided by Bob and Diana).
1. All the materials and products listed in the link metadata match, as
   specified by the layout. This will be used to prevent packages from being
altered without a record (missing link metadata), or tampered with while in
transit. In this case, the products reported by Diana should match the
materials reported by Bob and so on.
1. Finally, as is specified in the layout metadata, inspection steps are run on
   the client side. In this case, the tarball will be inspected to verify that
the extracted foo.py matches the one that was written by Diana. 

If all of these verifications pass, then installation continues as usual.
  
![figure 1](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/in-toto/image-resources/master/diagrams/png/in-toto-metadata.png)
    `Figure 1: The supply chain pieces for this example`

## 3 The final product

The final product is the bundle of link metadata, layout metadata and target
files that will be used by the client's system. Additional, project-specific
metadata can be also bundled in the final product for verification during
inspection steps.

An installer or package manager uses the framework to inspect the final product
and verify its contents. Each project will have specific requirements to
verify. For example, a project may want to impose a review policy on the VCS.
Thus, it requires in-toto to validate additional accompanying link and layout
metadata to verify the review policy was followed. 

### 3.1 Contents  

The final product must contain at least these three files:   

* The supply chain layout
* A link metadata file
* A target file

More complex and robust supply chain layouts will contain more pieces of link
metadata, as well as additional sublayout files. Additional metadata (e.g., a
signed git commit log) can also be provided to be used during inspection
phases.

#### 3.1.1 Supply chain Layout

The supply chain layout specifies each of the different steps and its
requirements, as well as the public keys used by functionaries to sign the link
metadata for  steps within the chain.

The layout will also specify how each piece of link metadata will be verified,
and how the chain steps are interconnected via their materials and products. 

#### 3.1.2 Link metadata

Link metadata is a statement that a step was carried out. Each piece of link
metadata will be used by the framework to ensure that materials and products
have not been altered in an unauthorized manner (e.g., while in transit), and,
that any alterations have been done only by an intended functionary.

#### 3.1.3 Target files

Target files are the files clients will install and use in their systems. For
example, a target file could be an installation disk image, which will be
bundled with link metadata for each step performed to create the target file.

#### 3.1.4 Additional metadata files

Additional metadata files can be shipped within the final product for
verification. In this case, inspection steps that utilize this metadata can be
declared to determine if this metadata is correct. These metadata files will be
treated as regular target files by the framework.

## 4 Document formats

In order to achieve the properties described in Section 1, link and layout
metadata must contain information that correctly depicts which operations are
intended, and that presents specifics of each operation within the supply
chain. In the following section, we describe which information is gathered and
how it is laid out within link and layout metadata. 

### 4.1 Metaformat

To provide descriptive examples, we will adopt "canonical JSON," as described
in http://wiki.laptop.org/go/Canonical\_JSON, as the data format. However,
applications that desire to implement in-toto are not required to use JSON.
Discussion about the intended data format for in-toto can be found in the
in-toto website. 

### 4.2 File formats: general principles

All signed files (i.e., link and layout files) have the format:

```json
   {
    "signed" : "ROLE",
     "signatures" : [
        { "keyid" : "KEYID",
          "method" : "METHOD",
          "sig" : "SIGNATURE" }
        , "..."]
   }
```

Where, ROLE is a dictionary whose "\_type" field describes the metadata type (as
described in sections 4.3 and 4.4). KEYID is the identifier of the key signing
the ROLE dictionary. METHOD is the key signing method used to generate the
signature. SIGNATURE is a signature of the canonical JSON form of ROLE.

The current reference implementation of in-toto defines two signing methods,
although in-toto is not restricted to any particular key signing method, key
type, or cryptographic library:
   
*   "RSASSA-PSS" : RSA Probabilistic signature scheme with [appendix](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3447#page-29).  
The underlying hash function is SHA256.
*   "ed25519" : Elliptic curve digital signature algorithm based on 
    [TwistedEdwards curves](http://ed25519.cr.yp.to/).

All keys have the format:

```json
  { "keytype" : "KEYTYPE",
    "keyval" : "KEYVAL" }
```

where KEYTYPE is a string describing the type of the key, and how it is used to
sign documents. The type determines the interpretation of KEYVAL.

We define two key types at present: 'rsa' and 'ed25519'.

The 'rsa' format is:

```json
  { "keytype" : "rsa",
    "keyval" : { "public" : "PUBLIC",
                 "private" : "PRIVATE" }
  }
```

where PUBLIC and PRIVATE are in PEM format and are strings.  All RSA keys must
be at least 2048 bits.

The 'ed25519' format is:

```json
  { "keytype" : "ed25519",
    "keyval" : { "public" : "PUBLIC",
                 "private" : "PRIVATE" }
  }
```

where PUBLIC and PRIVATE are both 32-byte strings.

Link and Layout metadata does not include the private portion of the key
object:

```json
  { "keytype" : "rsa",
    "keyval" : { "public" : "PUBLIC" }
  }
```

The KEYID of a key is the hexadecimal encoding of the SHA-256 hash of the
canonical JSON form of the key, where the "private" object key is excluded.

Date-time data follows the ISO 8601 standard.  The expected format of the
combined date and time string is "YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SSZ".  Time is always in
UTC, and the "Z" time zone designator is attached to indicate a zero UTC
offset.  An example date-time string is "1985-10-21T01:21:00Z".

#### 4.2.1 Hash object format

Hashes within in-toto are represented using a hash object. A hash object is a
dictionary that specifies one or more hashes, including the cryptographic hash
function. For example: `{ "sha256": HASH, ... }`, where HASH is the sha256 hash
encoded in hexadecimal notation.

### 4.3 File formats: layout

The layout file will be signed by a trusted key (e.g., one that was distributed
beforehand) and will indicate which keys are authorized for signing the link
metadata, as well as the required steps to perform in this supply chain.

The format of the layout file is as follows:

```json
    { "_type" : "layout",
       "expires" : "EXPIRES",
       "readme": "README",
       "keys" : {
           "KEYID" : "KEY",
            "...":"..." 
        },
       "steps" : [
           {"...":"..."}
       ],
       "inspections" : [
           {"...": "..."}
       ]
    }
```

EXPIRES determines when layout metadata should be considered expired and no
longer trusted by clients. Clients MUST NOT trust an expired file.

An optional README text can be added on the readme field. This is used to
provide a human-readable description of this supply chain.

The "keys" list will contain a list of all the public keys used in the steps
section, as they are described in 4.2.
// FIXME: needs to fix the referencews to the sections.

The `"steps"` section will contain a list of restrictions for each step within
the supply chain. It is also possible to further define steps by means of
sublayouts, so that they can further specify requirements to a section of the
supply chain (section 4.4.1).  We will describe the contents of the steps list
in section 4.3.1.

The `"inspections"` section will contain a list of restrictions for each step
within the link. In contrast to steps, inspecting is done by the client upon
verification. We will elaborate on the specifics of this process in section
4.3.2.


#### 4.3.1 Steps 

Steps performed by a functionary in the supply chain are declared as follows:

```json
    {
      "_name": "NAME",
      "threshold": "THRESHOLD",
      "expected_materials": [
         ["ARTIFACT_RULE"],
         "..."
      ],
      "expected_products": [
         ["ARTIFACT_RULE"],
         "..."
      ],
      "pubkeys": [
         "KEYID",
         "..."
      ],
      "expected_command": "COMMAND"
    }
```

The `NAME` string will be used to identify this step within the supply chain.
NAME values are unique and so they MUST not repeat in different step
descriptions.

The `"threshold"` field must contain an integer file indicating how many pieces
of link metadata must be provided to verify this step. This field is intended
to be used for steps that require a higher degree of trust, so multiple
functionaries must perform the operation and report the same results. If only
one functionary is expected to perform the step, then the "threshold" field
should be set to 1.

The `"expected_materials"` and `"expected_products"` fields contain a list of
`ARTIFACT_RULES`, as they are described in section 4.3.3. These rules are used
to ensure that no materials or products were altered between steps.

The `"pubkeys"` field will contain a list of KEYIDs (as described in section
4.2) of the keys that can sign the link metadata that corresponds to this step.

Finally, the `"expected_command"` field contains a string, COMMAND, describing
the suggested command to run. It is important to mention that, in a case where
a functionary’s key is compromised, this field can easily be forged (e.g., by
changing the PATH environment variable in a host) and thus it should not be
trusted for security checks. In addition, commands may be executed with
different flags at the behest of the functionary's personal preference (e.g., a
developer may run a command with --color=full or not). Because of this, during
verification, clients should only show a warning if the expected command field
does not match its counterpart in the link metadata. This warning may help
auditors check whether something was out of the norm, but will not make
verification fail, as these changes are not necessarily a problem.

It is also possible to divide a subchain by having a third-party project owner
define a layout for a section of the supply chain. This can be done by means of
sublayouts (as described in section 4.5). 

#### 4.3.2 Inspections 

In contrast to steps, inspections indicate operations that need to be performed
on the final product at the time of verification.  For example, unpacking a tar
archive to inspect its contents is an inspection step. When indicating
inspections, ARTIFACT rules  can be defined to ensure the integrity of the
final product. For example, MATCH rules are usually found in inspections to
provide insight about artifacts that were created or modified inside the supply
chain.

An inspection contains the following fields.

```json
    {
      "_name": "NAME",
      "expected_materials": [
         ["ARTIFACT_RULE"],
         "..."
      ],
      "expected_products": [
         ["ARTIFACT_RULE"],
         "..."
      ],
      "run": "COMMAND"
    }
```

Similar to steps, the `NAME` string will be used to identify this inspection
within the supply chain. NAME values are unique and so they MUST NOT repeat in
either steps or inspections.

Materials and products fields behave in the same way as they do for the steps
as defined in section 4.3.1.

Finally, the `"run"` field contains the command to run. This field will be used
to spawn a new process in the verification system to create a new piece of link
metadata that correspond to the inspection steps. After running the indicated
command, the materials and products fields will be verified using the artifact
rules for materials and products.

##### 4.3.2.1 Inspection interface

Executables used during an inspection need to communicate the result of running
the command with in-toto. To do so, in-toto provides a simple inspection
interface using the executable's return value:

* If the return value is 0, then the inspection was successful. All the
  artifacts and the rest of the information is recorded using the in-toto-run
tool, in the same fashion as used to collect steps.
* If the result is greater than 0 and less than 127, then the inspection was
  not successful and validation should halt.

#### 4.3.3 Artifact Rules 

Artifact rules are used to connect steps together through their materials or
products. When connecting steps together,  in-toto allows the project owner to
enforce the existence of certain artifacts within a step (e.g., the README can
only be created in the create-documentation step) and authorize operations on
artifacts (e.g., the compile step can use the materials from the checkout-vcs).
The `ARTIFACT_RULE` format is the following:

```
    {MATCH <pattern> [IN <source-path-prefix>] WITH (MATERIALS|PRODUCTS) [IN <destination-path-prefix>] FROM <step> || 
    CREATE <pattern> ||
    DELETE <pattern> ||
    MODIFY <pattern> ||
    ALLOW <pattern> ||
    REQUIRE <pattern> ||
    DISALLOW <pattern>}
```

The `"pattern"` value is a path-pattern that will be matched against paths
reported in the link metadata, including bash-style wildcards (e.g.,  "\*"). The
following rules can be specified for a step or inspection:

* **MATCH**: indicates that the files filtered in using
  source-path-prefix/pattern must be matched to a MATERIAL or PRODUCT  from a
destination step with the destination-path-prefix/pattern filter. For example,
`"MATCH foo WITH PRODUCTS FROM compilation"` indicates that the file foo, a
product of the step `"compilation,"` must correspond to either a material or a
product in this step (depending on where this artifact rule was listed).  More
complex uses of the MATCH rule are presented in the examples of section 5.1.

The `"IN <prefix>` clauses are optional, and they are used to match products
and materials whose path differs from the one presented in the destination
step. This is the case of steps that relocate files as part of their tasks. For
example MATCH foo IN lib WITH PRODUCT IN build/lib FROM compilation will ensure
that the file lib/foo matches build/lib/foo from the compilation step.


* **ALLOW**: indicates that the pattern appears as material or a product of
  this step.
* **DISALLOW**: indicates that no files matching a pattern can appear as a
  material or a product on this step.
* **REQUIRE**: indicates that a pattern must appear as a material or product of
  this step.
* **CREATE**: Indicates that products matched by the pattern must not appear as
  materials of this step. Note, the rule still passes if the pattern does not
match any products
* **DELETE**: indicates that materials matched by the pattern must not appear
  as products of this step. Note, the rule still passes if the pattern does not
match any materials.
* **MODIFY**: indicates that the PATH's hash must be updated in this step. In
  other words, this path must appear as a material and a product within this
step and their hashes must not match.

##### 4.3.3.1 MATCH rule behavior

The `MATCH` rule is used to tie different steps together, by means of their
materials and products. The main rationale behind the MATCH rule is to identify
the sources of artifacts as they are passed around in the supply chain. In this
sense, the MATCH rule will be used to identify which step should be providing a
material used in a step, as well as force products to match with products of
previous steps.

In order to ensure the correctness of the MATCH rule, it is important to
describe the way it operates. To avoid any ambiguities, this will be done with
the following pseudocode:

```python
MATCH(source_materials_or_products_set, destination_materials_or_products_set, 
      rule)

# Filter source and destination materials using the rule’s patterns
source_artifacts_filtered = filter(rule.source_prefix + rule.source_pattern,  
                                   source_materials_or_products_set)

destination_artifacts_filtered\
     = filter(rule.destination_prefix + rule.destination_pattern, 
                                        destination_materials_or_products_set) 

# Apply the IN clauses, to the paths, if any
for artifact in source_artifacts_filtered:
        artifact.path -= rule.source_in_clause
for artifact in destination_artifacts_filtered:
        artifact.path -= rule.destination_in_clause

# compare both sets
for artifact in source_artifacts_filtered:
        destination_artifact = find_artifact_by_path(destination_artifacts,
                                                    artifact.path)
        # the artifact with this path does not exist?
        if destination_artifact == NULL:
                return FAIL
 
        # are the files not the same?
        if destination_artifact.hash != artifact.hash:
                return FAIL


# all of the files filtered by the source materials exist 
return SUCCESS
```

Notice that if a source pattern does not match anything, verification will pass
as long as no target artifact is matched either. To enforce that an artifact
exists, the CREATE rule must be applied in the intended step. 


##### 4.3.3.2 Verifying `expected_products` and `expected_materials`

Rules inside the `expected_products` and `expected_materials` field are matched
in the same way that a firewall behaves. Here, we describe an algorithm to
illustrate the behavior of the rules being applied

```python
VERIFY_EXPECTED_ARTIFACTS(rule_set, link, target_links)
                
# load the artifacts from the link
artifacts = load_artifacts_as_queue(link)


# iterate over all the rules
for rule in rules:
        matched_artifacts, rule_error = apply_rule(rule, artifacts)


        if rule_error:
                return ERROR("Rule failed to verify!")


        artifacts -= matched_artifacts


# check if there were any artifacts that weren't matched by the rules
if artifacts is not empty:
        return ERROR("There were unmatched artifacts in this set!")


return SUCCESS
```

This algorithm ensures that all the files have a rule that allows them to be
there. Notice that these rules apply sequentially, so if there are two rules
that apply to the same artifact, only the first one will be used.


### 4.4 File formats: `[name].[KEYID-PREFIX].link`


The `[name].[KEYID-PREFIX].link` file will contain the information recorded
from the execution of a supply chain step. It lists relevant information, such
as the command executed, the materials used, and the changes made to such
materials (products), as well as other host information.


The name for link metadata files must contain two elements: the name of the
step, and the first six bytes of the functionary’s keyid separated by a dot.
The `KEYID` portion of the name is used to avoid collisions in steps that have
thresholds higher than one.


The format of the `[name].[KEYID-PREFIX].link` file is as follows:

```json
 { "_type" :  "link",
   "_name" :  "NAME",
   "command" : "COMMAND",
   "materials": {
      "PATH": "HASH",
      "...": "..."
   },
   "products": {
      "PATH": "HASH",
      "...": "..."
   },
   "byproducts": {
        "stdin": "",
        "stdout": "",
        "return-value": ""
    }
 }
```

To identify to which step a piece of link metadata belongs, the `NAME` field must
be set to the same identifier as the step described in the layout, as specified
in section 4.3.1.

The `COMMAND` field contains the command and its arguments as executed by the
functionary.


The `"materials"` and `"products"` fields are dictionaries keyed by a file’s
`PATH`. Each `HASH` value is a hash object as described in section 4.2.1.

The `"byproducts"` field is an opaque dictionary that contains additional
information about the step performed. Byproducts are not verified by in-toto’s
default verification routine. However, the information gathered can be used for
further scrutiny during an inspection step. At a minimum, the byproducts
dictionary should have standard output (stdout), standard input (stdin) and
return value (return-value), even if no values are filled in.


### 4.5 Specifying sublayouts 

It is possible that a project owner cannot define all the steps at the
appropriate level of detail. Such a case might occur with a software project
that statically compiles a third-party library or when a vendor is packaging
software that is written upstream. When this is the case, additional layouts
can be used to describe parts of the supply chain with more granularity. We
call these additional layouts sublayouts.

To create a sublayout, a series of steps are declared, and thus the functionary
will take the role of a third party project owner. Sublayouts are saved with
the [name].[hashprefix].link format, and they will have the same format
described for a layout file described in section 4.3 instead of the usual
contents of a link metadata file. 

For example, consider a project in which the build step is not completely clear
for the project owner (Alice). However, Alice trusts Bob to perform this
operation. Bob, in turn, trusts additional functionaries to perform
build-related operations. Because of this, Bob will create a sublayout of the
build step by creating a layout file. This newly-created layout file will
contain further steps, keyids and artifact rules within the steps.  The
signature of this new layout file must match the one the top-level project
owner intended for this step (in this case, Bob's).

#### 4.5.1 Artifact rules in sublayouts 

When using sublayouts, the artifact rules that apply to the equivalent step are
applied to the materials of the first step in the sublayout and the products of
the last step of the sublayout. This is, for the upper-layer layout, the
materials and products presented for matching will be derived from the
materials of the first step and the products of the last step.

In the context of our example above, Alice's layout will define the artifact
rules that apply to the build step. When Alice's layout is verified, the
verification algorithm will recurse into Bob's layout, perform verification and
present a "virtual" piece of link metadata that can be used to verify Alice's
layout. The materials of this virtual piece of link metadata will be those of
the first step on Bob's sublayout, and the products will be those on the last
step of Bob's sublayout.


#### 4.5.2 Namespacing link metadata

Link metadata that pertains to a sublayout must be placed on a folder for such
layout. The name of the folder will be have the same format as the link
metadata filename without the .link metadata suffix. This is necessary to avoid
clashes between step names on layouts and sublayouts, as the creator of a
layout may not be aware of the names used by the creators of sublayouts.


In our example above, the layout file would be stored under the name
`build.BOBS_KEYID.link`, and the corresponding pieces of link metadata will be
stored on a folder named `build.BOBS_KEYID`.

#### 4.5.3 Inspections on sublayouts

Inspections in sublayouts can be verified in two ways:

* A piece of signed link metadata is presented for the inspection. The key to
  sign for this piece of link metadata must be the same key used to sign the
sublayout file.
* If the piece of link metadata is not present, the client must perform that
  inspection upon validation. When this is the case, the inspection must be run
while validating the sublayout. This means when the verification algorithm
recurses inside the sublayout.

If inspections are to be run during verification, its materials and products
are not presented to the upper layer layout. This is because it is highly
unlikely the results of the inspections are to be used by the upper-layer
layout.

## 5 Detailed workflows

To provide further detail of in-toto’s workflow, we describe a detailed case
that includes most of the concepts explained in sections 3 and 4. This is an
error-free case. 

1. The project owner defines the layout to be followed by, e.g. using the
   in-toto CLI tools. When doing so, he or she instructs who is intended to
sign for every piece of link metadata, any sublayouts that may exist, and how
to further verify accompanying metadata.
1. Functionaries perform the intended actions and produce link metadata for
   each step.
1. Once all the steps are performed, the final product is shipped to the
   client.
1. in-oto's verification tools are run on the final product. 
1. in-oto inspects the final product to find a root.layout file that describes
   the top-level layout for the project. The signature(s) on the file are
checked using previously-acquired project owner public key(s). Subsequently, if
the layout signature verification passes, the functionaries’ public keys are
loaded from the layout.        
1. The expiration time is verified to ensure that this layout is still fresh.
1. The steps, as defined in the layout, are loaded. For each step in the
   layout, one or more pieces of link or layout metadata is loaded. 
1. If the file loaded metadata is a link metadata file, a data structure
   containing the materials and products is populated with the reported values.

If more than one piece of link metadata are loaded due to the threshold value,
their materials and products fields must exactly match.


1. If the file is a layout file instead, the algorithm will recurse into that
   layout, starting from step 5. 
1. If there is a layout file in conjunction with a link file (i.e., one of the
   functionaries made a sublayout while others didn’t), then verification
should fail. The reason as to why this happens is to avoid ambiguities between
both versions of the supply chain.
1. Inspection steps are executed, and the corresponding materials and products
   data structures are populated.
1. Matching rules are applied against the products and materials reported by
   each step as described by the algorithm in section 4.3.3.2.
1. If all these steps are successful, verification is done. The user can now
   use the final product.

### 5.1 Supply chain examples

To better understand how in-toto works, we provide a series of examples of the
framework being used in practice. We will start with a simple example to
showcase how the relevant aspects of in-toto come into play. After this, we
will present a more complete and realistic example. Additional link and layout
metadata examples can be found at in-toto.io.  

#### 5.1.2 Alice's Python script 

This first example covers a simple scenario to show in-toto's elements without
focusing on the details of a real-life supply chain.

In this case, Alice writes a Python script (foo.py) using her editor of choice.
Once this is done, she will provide the script to her friend, Bob, who will
package the script into a tarball (foo.tar.gz). This tarball will be sent to
the client, Carl, as part of the final product.

When providing Carl with the tarball, Alice's layout tells Carl's installation
script that it must make sure of the following:

* That the script was written by Alice herself 
* That the packaging was done by Bob
* Finally, since Bob is sometimes sloppy when packaging, Carl must also make
  sure that the script contained in the tarball matches the one that Alice
reported on the link metadata.

As a result of this, Alice's layout would have two steps and one inspection.
A `root.layout` file that fulfills these requirements would look like this:

```json
    {"signed" : { 
      "_type" : "layout",
      "expires" : "EXPIRES",
      "keys" : {
          "BOBS_KEYID" : "BOBS_PUBKEY",
          "ALICES_KEYID": "ALICES_PUBKEY"
       },
      "steps" : [
           {
             "_name": "write-code",
             "threshold": 1,
             "expected_materials": [ ],
             "expected_products": [
                [["CREATE", "foo.py"]]
             ],
             "pubkeys": [
                "ALICES_KEYID"
             ],
             "expected_command": "vi"
           },
           {
             "_name": "package",
             "threshold": 1,
             "expected_materials": [
                [["MATCH", "foo.py", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "write-code"]]
             ],
             "expected_products": [
                [["CREATE", "foo.tar.gz"]]
             ],
             "pubkeys": [
                "BOBS_KEYID"
             ],
             "expected_command": "tar zcvf foo.tar.gz foo.py"
           }],
        "inspect": [
           {
             "_name": "inspect_tarball",
             "expected_materials": [
                [["MATCH", "foo.tar.gz", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "package"]]
             ],
             "expected_products": [
                [["MATCH", "foo.py", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "write-code"]]
             ],
             "run": "inspect_tarball.sh foo.tar.gz"
           }
        ]},
        "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "ALICES_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "90d2a06c7a6c2a6a93a9f5771eb2e5ce0c93dd580beb..."
              }
            ]
    }
```

From this layout file, we can see that Alice is expected to create a foo.py
script using vi. The signed link metadata should be done with Alice's key (for
simplicity, the same key is used to sign the layout and the first link
metadata). After this, Bob is expected to use `"tar zcvf ..."` to create a
tarball, and ship it to Carl. We assume that Carl’s machine already hosts an
`inspect_tarball.sh` script, which will be used to inspect the contents of the
tarball.

After both steps are performed, we expect to see the following pieces of link
metadata:

#### `write-code.[ALICE-KEYID-PREFIX].link:`

```json
    {"signed" : { 
           "_type" :  "link",
           "name": "write-code",
           "command" : "vi foo.py",
           "materials": { },
           "products": {
              "foo.py": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d"}
           },
           "byproducts": {
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
    },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "ALICES_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" :
              "94df84890d7ace3ae3736a698e082e12c300dfe5aee92ea33a8f461f..."
              }
        ]
    }    
```

#### `package.[BOB-KEYID-PREFIX].link:`

```json
{"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
       "Name": "package",
       "command" : "tar zcvf foo.tar.gz foo.py",
       "materials": { 
          "foo.py": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d..."}
       },
       "products": {
          "foo.tar.gz": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b..."}
       },
       "byproducts": {             
         "stdin": "",
 "stdout": "foo.py",
         "return-value": "0"
         }
     },
"signatures" : [
        { "keyid" : "BOBS_KEYID",
          "method" : "ed25519",
          "sig" :
          "ae3aee92ea33a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022a06c7a6c2..."
          }
    ]
} 
```

With these three pieces of metadata, along with foo.tar.gz, Carl can now
perform verification and install Alice's foo.py script.

When Carl is verifying, his  installer will perform the following checks:

1. The root.layout file exists and is signed with a trusted key (in this case,
   Alice's). 
1. Every step in the layout has a corresponding [name].link metadata file
   signed by the intended functionary.
1. All the matching rules on every step match the rest of the [name].link
   metadata files.

Finally, inspection steps are run on the client side. In this case, the tarball
will be extracted using `inspect_tarball.sh` and the contents will be checked
against the script that Alice reported in the link metadata.

If all of these verifications pass, then installation continues as usual.

#### 5.1.2 Alice uses testing (with a threshold of 2)

The first example covered a simple scenario to show in-toto's elements without
focusing on the details of a real-life supply chain. We will complicate things
a little bit further now by adding a testing step. Given that tests are
critical, Alice will want two people to independently run the tests. This will
be done by using the threshold field, as described in section 4.xxx.

In this case, Alice uses the same Python script as before, which will be
packaged again by Bob. However, in order to guarantee that things are proper,
Alice writes a test script (test.py) and asks her friends Caroline and Alfred
to run it. Given that she wants to be extra sure things work, both her friends
must provide link metadata showing that the tests completed successfully.

When providing Carl with the tarball, Alice's layout tells Carl's installation
script that it must make sure of the following:


* That the script was written by Alice herself 
* That the test suite was run by Caroline and Alfred
* That the packaging was done by Bob
* Finally, since Bob is sometimes sloppy when packaging, Carl must also make
  sure that the script contained in the tarball matches the one that Alice
reported on the link metadata.

As a result of this, Alice's layout would have two steps and one inspection.

A `root.layout` file that fulfills these requirements would look like this:

```json
    {"signed" : { 
      "_type" : "layout",
      "expires" : "EXPIRES",
      "keys" : {
          "BOBS_KEYID" : "BOBS_PUBKEY",
          "ALICES_KEYID" : "ALICES_PUBKEY",
          "CAROLINES_KEYID" : "CAROLINES_PUBKEY",
          "ALFREDS_KEYID" : "ALFREDS_PUBKEY"
       },
      "steps" : [
           {
             "_name": "write-code",
             "threshold": 1,
             "expected_materials": [ ],
             "expected_products": [
                [["CREATE", "foo.py"]]
             ],
             "pubkeys": [
                "ALICES_KEYID"
             ],
             "expected_command": "vi"
           },
           {
             "_name": "test",
             "threshold": 2,
             "expected_materials": [
                ["MATCH", "foo.py", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "write-code"],
                ["MATCH", "test.py", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "write-code"]
            ],
             "expected_products": [],
             "pubkeys": [
                "CAROLINES_KEYID",
                "ALFREDS_KEYID"
             ],
             "expected_command": "python test.py"
           },
           {
             "_name": "package",
             "threshold": 1,
             "expected_materials": [
                ["MATCH", "foo.py", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "write-code"]
             ],
             "expected_products": [
                ["CREATE", "foo.tar.gz"]
             ],
             "pubkeys": [
                "BOBS_KEYID"
             ],
             "expected_command": "tar zcvf foo.tar.gz foo.py"
           }],
        "inspect": [
           {
             "_name": "inspect_tarball",
             "expected_materials": [
                [["MATCH", "foo.tar.gz", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "package"]]
             ],
             "expected_products": [
                [["MATCH", "foo.py", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "write-code"]]
             ],
             "run": "inspect_tarball.sh foo.tar.gz"
           }
        ]},
        "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "ALICES_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "90d2a06c7a6c2a6a93a9f5771eb2e5ce0c93d..."
              }
            ]
    }    
```

From this layout file, we can see that Alice is expected to create a foo.py
script using vi. The signed link metadata should be done with Alice's key (for
simplicity, the same key is used to sign the layout and the first link
metadata). After this, Bob is expected to use `"tar zcvf ..."` to create a
tarball, and ship it to Carl. We assume that Carl’s machine already hosts an
`inspect_tarball.sh` script, which will be used to inspect the contents of the
tarball.

After both steps are performed, we expect to see the following pieces of link
metadata:

##### `write-code.[ALICE-KEYID-PREFIX].link:`

```json
    {"signed" : { 
           "_type" :  "link",
           "name": "write-code",
           "command" : "vi foo.py",
           "materials": { },
           "products": {
              "foo.py": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d"},
              "test.py": { "sha256": "e3ae3736a698e082e12c300dfe5aeee7cb"}
           },
           "byproducts": {
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
    },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "ALICES_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" :
              "94df84890d7ace3ae3736a698e082e12c300dfe5aee92ea33a8f461f..."
            }
        ]
    }    
```

##### `test.[CAROLINES_KEYID_PREFIX].link:`

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
           "Name": "package",
           "command" : "python test.py",
           "materials": { 
              "foo.py": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d"},
              "test.py": { "sha256": "e3ae3736a698e082e12c300dfe5aeee7cb"}
           },
           "products": {},
           "byproducts": {             
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "....\nOk",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
         },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "CAROLINES_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" :
              "a2e5ce0c9e3aee92ea33a8cfd6eaedf1d5aa3efec2080d1094df..."
            }
        ]
    }
```

To avoid repetitivity, we omit Alfred's version of the link metadata, which
looks really similar (modulo the signature and the filename).

##### `package.[BOB-KEYID-PREFIX].link:`

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
           "Name": "package",
           "command" : "tar zcvf foo.tar.gz foo.py",
           "materials": { 
              "foo.py": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d"}
           },
           "products": {
              "foo.tar.gz": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
           },
           "byproducts": {             
             "stdin": "",
              "stdout": "foo.py",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
    },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "BOBS_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" :
              "ae3aee92ea33a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022a06c7a6c2..."
            }
        ]
    } 
```

With these five pieces of metadata, along with foo.tar.gz, Carl can now perform
verification and install Alice's `foo.py` script.

When Carl is verifying, his  installer will perform the following checks:


1. The root.layout file exists and is signed with a trusted key (in this case,
   Alice's). 
1. The code that Alice wrote was tested by two people, in this case, Caroline
   and Alfred.
1. Every step in the layout has a corresponding [name].link metadata file
   signed by the intended functionary.
1. All the matching rules on every step match the rest of the [name].link
   metadata files.

Finally, inspection steps are run on the client side. In this case, the tarball
will be extracted using `inspect_tarball.sh` and the contents will be checked
against the script that Alice reported in the link metadata.

If all of these verifications pass, then installation continues as usual.

#### Alice uses a version control system

This time, Alice uses a Version Control System (VCS) to ease collaboration with
Diana, a new developer on the team. Since efficiency is now an issue, Alice
also ported her Python script to C. Lastly, a third-party (Eleanor) has been
assigned to compile the binary.

In this case, Alice and Diana commit to their central repository, and update
their source file (src/foo.c). When all the milestones are met, Alice --- and
only Alice ---  will tag the sources and send them to Eleanor for compilation. 

When Eleanor receives the tarball, she is required to compile the source code
into the binary (foo), and send it over to Bob, who is still in charge of
packaging. Bob will package and send foo.tar.gz to Carl, so he can install and
use the product.

When providing Carl with the tarball, Alice's layout tells Carl that he must
make sure of the following:

* That the source code was written by Alice and Diana
* That tagging was done by Alice
* That compilation was done by Eleanor
* That Eleanor's binary was packaged by Bob

Finally, since Bob is sometimes sloppy when packaging, Carl must also make sure
that the binary contained in the tarball matches the one that Eleanor reported
at the end of her step. Also, in order to ensure that the VCS was only altered
by Diana and Alice, an additional piece of metadata (a signed log) is provided
that Carl will inspect to ensure it is correct. Both of these operations are to
be done when performing inspection steps.

As a result of this, Alice's layout would have three steps and two inspections.

A `root.layout` file that fulfills these requirements would look like this:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" : "layout",
           "expires" : "EXPIRES",
           "keys" : {
               "BOBS_KEYID" : "BOBS_PUBKEY",
               "DIANAS_KEYID" : "DIANAS_PUBKEY",
               "ELEANORS_KEYID" : "ELEANORS_PUBKEY",
               "ALICES_KEYID": "ALICES_PUBKEY"
            },
           "steps" : [
                {
                  "_name": "checkout-vcs",
                           "threshold": 1,
                  "expected_materials": [ ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["CREATE", "src/foo.c"],
                     ["CREATE", "vcs.log"]
                  ],
                  "pubkeys": [
                    "ALICES_KEYID"
                  ],
                  "expected_command": "git tag"
                },
                {
                  "_name": "compilation",
                        "threshold": 1,
                        "expected_materials": [
                        ["MATCH", "src/foo.c", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "checkout-vcs"]
                  ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["CREATE", "foo"]
                  ],
                  "pubkeys": [
                     "ELEANORS_KEYID"
                  ],
                  "expected_command": "gcc -o foo src/foo.c"
                },
                {
                  "_name": "package",
                           "threshold": 1,
                  "expected_materials": [
                     ["MATCH", "foo", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "compilation"]
                  ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["CREATE", "foo.tar.gz"]
                  ],
                  "pubkeys": [
                     "BOBS_KEYID"
                  ],
                  "expected_command": "tar -zcvf foo.tar.gz foo"
                }
            ],
            "inspect": [
                {
                  "_name": "check-package",
                  "expected_materials": [
                     ["MATCH", "foo.tar.gz", "WITH", "PRODUCTS","FROM", "package"]
                  ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["MATCH", "src/foo.c", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "checkout-vcs"]
                  ],
                  "run": "inspect_tarball.sh foo.tar.gz"
                },
                {
                  "_name": "verify-vcs-commits",
                  "expected_materials": [
                     ["MATCH", "vcs.log", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "checkout-vcs"]
                  ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["MATCH", "src/foo.c", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "checkout-vcs"]
                  ],
                  "run": "inspect_vcs_log -l vcs.log -P ALICES_PUBKEY -P DIANAS_PUBKEY"
                }
           ]
    },
    "signatures" : [
        { "keyid" : "ALICES_KEYID",
          "method" : "ed25519",
          "sig" : "90d2a06c7a6c2a6a93a9f5771eb2e5ce0c93dd580bebc....."
          }
        ]
    }    
```

In contrast to the previous example, Carl will perform two different
inspections on the final product. While the inspection of the tarball will be
performed in the same manner as in the previous example, there is a new
inspection phase that must verify a signed log from the VCS. 

Because of this, the `vcs.log` is listed as a product from the first step. It
will be used to verify the operations within the VCS by executing a
VCS-specific script that was shipped along with the client. It is worth noting,
however, that the relevant public keys are passed as arguments to the script,
for the script and its parameters are agnostic to in-toto.

When the three steps are carried out, we expect to see the following pieces of
link metadata:

##### `checkout-vcs.[KEID].link`:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
            "name": "checkout-vcs",
           "command" : "git tag 1.0",
           "materials": { },
           "products": {
              "src/foo.c": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d"},
              "vcs.log": { "sha256": "e64589ab156f325a4ab2bc5d532737d5a7"}
           },
           "return-value": "0",
           "byproducts": {
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
         },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "ALICES_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" :
              "94df84890d7ace3ae3736a698e082e12c300dfe5aee92ea33a8f461f..."
              }
        ]
    }    
```

##### `compilation.link`:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
            "name": "compilation",
           "command" : "gcc -o foo foo.c",
           "materials": { 
              "src/foo.c": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d"}
           },
           "products": {
              "foo": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
           },
           "byproducts": {             
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
         },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "ELEANORS_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" :
              "ae3aee92ea33a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022a06c7a6c2..."
              }
        ]
    } 
```

##### `package.link`:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
           "name": "package",
           "command" : "tar zcvf foo.tar.gz foo",
           "materials": { 
              "foo": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
           },
           "products": {
              "foo.tar.gz": { "sha256": "f73c9cd37d8a6e2035d0eed767f9cd5e"}
           },
           "byproducts":  {             
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
        },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "BOBS_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "ae3aee92ea3a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022a06c7a6c2..."
            }
        ]
    } 
```

With these three pieces of metadata, along with foo.tar.gz, Carl can now
perform verification as we described in the previous example.

#### 5.1.4  Alice uses a third party sublayout

A common scenario in software distributions is that source code is produced
upstream. For example, in Linux distributions, the source code for bash (the
default shell in many distributions) is written by the Free Software
Foundation. Given this, the task of writing the source code, is left to the
third-party, often referred to as "upstream," to define. 

In this example, the maintainer will let the upstream developers define  the
"write-code" task in a sublayout, while the compilation and package steps will
be performed by local contributors to the project. For brevity, we will skip
the pieces of link metadata that are relevant to the sublayout. In addition,
inspections on the top-level layout will be omitted to simplify both layouts.

A root.layout file that fulfills these requirements would look like this:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" : "layout",
           "expires" : "EXPIRES",
           "keys" : {
               "BOBS_KEYID" : "BOBS_PUBKEY",
               "DIANAS_KEYID" : "DIANAS_PUBKEY",
               "ELEANORS_KEYID" : "ELEANORS_PUBKEY",
               "UPSTREAM_KEYID": "UPSTREAM_KEYID"
            },
           "steps" : [
                {
                  "_name": "fetch-upstream",
                           "threshold": 1,
                  "expected_materials": [ ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["CREATE", "src/*"]
                  ],
                  "pubkeys": [
                     "UPSTREAM_KEYID"
                  ],
                  "expected_command": ""
                },
                {
                  "_name": "compilation",
                  "threshold": 1,
                  "expected_materials": [
                     ["MATCH", "src/*", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "fetch-upstream"]
                  ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["CREATE", "foo"]
                  ],
                  "pubkeys": [
                     "ELEANORS_KEYID"
                  ],
                  "expected_command": "gcc -o foo src/*"
                },
                {
                  "_name": "package",
                           "threshold": 1,
                  "expected_materials": [
                     ["MATCH","foo", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "compilation"]
                  ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["CREATE", "foo.tar.gz"]
                  ],
                  "pubkeys": [
                     "BOBS_KEYID"
                  ],
                  "expected_command": "tar -zcvf foo.tar.gz foo"
                }
            ],
            "inspect": []
        },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "ALICES_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "90d2a06c7a6c2a6a93a9f5771eb2e5ce0c93dd580bebc20..."
              }
        ]
    }    
```

##### `fetch-upstream.[KEYID].link`:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" : "layout",
           "expires" : "EXPIRES",
           "keys" : {
               "UPSTREAM_DEV1_KEYID": "UPSTREAM_DEV1_KEY",
               "UPSTREAM_DEV2_KEYID": "UPSTREAM_DEV2_KEY"
            },
           "steps" : [
                {
                  "_name": "checkout-vcs",
                  "threshold": 1,
                  "expected_materials": [ ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["CREATE", "src/*"],
                     ["CREATE", "vcs.log"]
                  ],
                  "pubkeys": [
                     "UPSTREAM_DEV1_KEYID"
                  ],
                  "expected_command": "git tag -s"
                },
                {
                  "_name": "compile-docs",
                  "threshold": 1,
                  "expected_materials": [
                     ["MATCH", "src/*", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "check-out-vcs"]
                  ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["CREATE", "doc/*"]
                  ],
                  "pubkeys": [
                     "UPSTREAM_DEV2_KEYID"
                  ],
                  "expected_command": "sphinx"
                }
            ],
            "inspect": [
                {
                  "_name": "verify-vcs-commits",
                  "expected_materials": [
                     ["MATCH", "vcs.log", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "check-out-vcs"]
                  ],
                  "expected_products": [
                     ["MATCH", "src/*", "WITH", "PRODUCTS", "FROM", "check-out-vcs"]
                  ],
                  "run": "inspect_vcs_log -l vcs.log -P UPSTREAM_PUBKEY -P UPSTREAM_PUBKEY"
                }
            ]
        },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "UPSTREAM_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "90d2a06c7a6c2a6a93a9f5771eb2e5ce0c93dd580bebc2..."
              }
        ]
    }
```

##### `check-out-vcs.[KEYID].link`:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
            "name": "compilation",
           "command" : "gcc -o foo foo.c",
           "materials": { 
           },
           "products": {
              "src/foo.c": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d"},
              "vcs.log": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
           },
           "byproducts":  {             
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
         },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "UPSTREAM_DEV1_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" :
              "ae3aee92ea33a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022a06c7a6c2..."
              }
        ]
    } 
```

##### `compile-docs.[KEYID].link`:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
           "name": "package",
           "command" : "tar zcvf foo.tar.gz foo",
           "materials": { 
              "foo": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
           },
           "products": {
              "foo/doc/index.html": { "sha256": "f73c9cd37d8a6e2035d0eed767f9cd5e"}
           },
           "byproducts":  {             
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
         },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "UPSTREAM_DEV2_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "ae3aee92ea33a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022a06c7a6c2..."
              }
        ]
    } 
```

##### `verify-vcs-commits.[KEYID]link` (upstream inspection):

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
           "name": "package",
           "command" : "inspect_vcs_log -l vcs.log -P UPSTREAM_PUBKEY -P UPSTREAM_PUBKEY",
           "materials": {
              "vcs.log": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
            },
           "products": {
              "foo/foo.c": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
            },
           "byproducts": {             
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
         },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "UPSTREAM_DEV2_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "aee92ea33a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022a06c7a6c2..."
              }
        ]
    } 
```

##### `compilation.[KEYID].link`:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
            "name": "compilation",
           "command" : "gcc -o foo foo.c",
           "materials": { 
              "src/foo.c": { "sha256": "2a0ffef5e9709e6164c629e8b31bae0d"}
           },
           "products": {
              "foo": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
           },
           "byproducts":  {             
             "stdin": "",
             "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
            }
         },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "ELEANORS_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "ae3aee92ea33a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022aa6c2..."
              }
        ]
    } 
```

##### `package.[KEYID].link`:

```json
    {"signed" : { "_type" :  "link",
           "name": "package",
           "command" : "tar zcvf foo.tar.gz foo",
           "materials": { 
              "foo": { "sha256": "78a73f2e55ef15930b137e43b9e90a0b"}
           },
           "products": {
              "foo.tar.gz": { "sha256": "f73c9cd37d8a6e2035d0eed767f9cd5e"}
           },
           "byproducts":  {             
             "stdin": "",
              "stdout": "",
             "return-value": "0"
             }
         },
    "signatures" : [
            { "keyid" : "BOBS_KEYID",
              "method" : "ed25519",
              "sig" : "aea92ea33a8f461f736a698e082e12c300dfe5022a06c7a6c2..."
              }
        ]
    } 
```

From this example, we can see that the "fetch-upstream" link is actually a
layout file that further defines two steps: check-out-vcs and compile docs.
These two steps are performed and verified in the same way as the top-level
link metadata. 

Notice also, that the inspection is run by the upstream developer, and produces
link metadata that is signed with the same key as the layout. If this piece of
link metadata was missing, the client would be in charge of running the
inspection (which would require the vcs.log file to be shipped along with the
final product).  

## 6 Learn More

This document introduced in-toto, a framework to secure the integrity of
software supply chains. Although minimal, this framework aims to be easily
extensible to include further restrictions (by means of inspections) that are
specific to each supply chain. This allows the framework to offer a large
degree of flexibility to meet varied applications.

We invite all interested parties to test our reference implementation of
in-toto here, take a look at our examples, or read more about in-toto [here](https://in-toto.io).
